---
layout: post
title: "Man's Searching for Meaning"
date: 2019-02-13T11:44:02-05:00
---

This books explores the psychological effects a concentration camp
has on the average prisoner and talks about the author's personal
experiences.

> Every man was controlled by one thought only: to keep himself alive
> for the family waiting for him at home, and to save his friends. With
> no hesitation, therefore, he would arrange for another prisoner,
> another “number,” to take his place in the transport.

There are 3 phases on the inmate's mental reactions to camp life:

1. The period following his admission, which is characterized by *shock*
2. The period when he is well entrenched in camp routine: Characterize by *apathy*, the blunting of the emotions and the feeling that one could not care any more.
3. The period following his release and liberation.

## First stage

Upon arriving to Auschwitz prisoners were greet by there were some
people who "spoke in every possible European tongue, and all with a
certain amount of humor, which sounded grotesque under the
circumstances". Why did this prisoner looked so well? Could other
shares their position? During this time, Frankl experience what is
known as `delusion of reprieve`.

> In psychiatry there is a certain condition known as “delusion of reprieve.” The condemned man, immediately before his execution, gets the illusion that he might be reprieved at the very last minute.

When we have nothing to lose we might as well just make fun of our
naked lives, as did the prisoners when getting showers uncertain if
water or gas would come from the pipes.


Thus the illusions some of us still held were destroyed one by one,
and then, quite unexpectedly, most of us were overcome by a grim sense
of humor. We knew that we had nothing to lose except our so
ridiculously naked lives. When the showers started to run, we all
tried very hard to make fun, both about ourselves and about each
other. After all, real water did flow from the sprays!


I think it was Lessing who once said, “There are things which must cause you to lose your reason or you have none to lose.” An abnormal reaction to an abnormal situation is normal behavior.

## Second stage
Apathy, the blunting of the emotions and the feeling that one could not care any more, were the symptoms arising during the second stage of the prisoner’s psychological reactions, and which eventually made him insensitive to daily and hourly beatings.


I want to show with this apparently trivial story that there are
moments when indignation can rouse even a seemingly hardened
prisoner—indignation not about cruelty or pain, but about the insult
connected with it. That time blood rushed to my head because I had to
listen to a man judge my life who had so little idea of it, a man (I
must confess: the following remark, which I made to my
fellow-prisoners after the scene, afforded me childish relief) “who
looked so vulgar and brutal that the nurse in the out-patient ward in
my hospital would not even have admitted him to the waiting room.”


Apathy: Lack of interests, enthusiasm or concern.


Apathy, the main symptom of the second phase, was a necessary mechanism of self-defense. Reality dimmed, and all efforts and all emotions were centered on one task: preserving one’s own life and that of the other fellow.


Those who have not gone through a similar experience can hardly conceive of the soul-destroying mental conflict and clashes of will power which a famished man experiences. They can hardly grasp what it means to stand digging in a trench, listening only for the siren to announce 9:30 or 10:00 A.M.—the half-hour lunch interval—when bread would be rationed out (as long as it was still available); repeatedly asking the foreman—if he wasn’t a disagreeable fellow—what the time was; and tenderly touching a piece of bread in one’s coat pocket, first stroking it with frozen gloveless fingers, then breaking off a crumb and putting it in one’s mouth and finally, with the last bit of will power, pocketing it again, having promised oneself that morning to hold out till afternoon.




A thought transfixed me: for the first time in my life I saw the truth
as it is set into song by so many poets, proclaimed as the final
wisdom by so many thinkers. The truth—that love is the ultimate and
the highest goal to which man can aspire. Then I grasped the meaning
of the greatest secret that human poetry and human thought and belief
have to impart: The salvation of man is through love and in love.


Mastering the art of living require us to develop a sense of humor and see things in a humorous way.

The attempt to develop a sense of humor and to see things in a
humorous light is some kind of a trick learned while mastering the art
of living. Yet it is possible to practice the art of living even in a
concentration camp, although suffering is omnipresent. To draw an
analogy: a man’s suffering is similar to the behavior of gas. If a
certain quantity of gas is pumped into an empty chamber, it will fill
the chamber completely and evenly, no matter how big the chamber. Thus
suffering completely fills the human soul and conscious mind, no
matter whether the suffering is great or little. Therefore the “size”
of human suffering is absolutely relative.

On judging:

No man should judge unless he asks himself in absolute honesty whether in a similar situation he might not have done the same.


We found out just how uncertain human decisions are, especially in matters of life and death.


In attempting this psychological presentation and a psychopathological
explanation of the typical characteristics of a concentration camp
inmate, I may give the impression that the human being is completely
and unavoidably influenced by his surroundings. (In this case the
surroundings being the unique structure of camp life, which forced the
prisoner to conform his conduct to a certain set pattern.) But what
about human liberty? Is there no spiritual freedom in regard to
behavior and reaction to any given surroundings? Is that theory true
which would have us believe that man is no more than a product of many
conditional and environmental factors—be they of a biological,
psychological or sociological nature? Is man but an accidental product
of these? Most important, do the prisoners’ reactions to the singular
world of the concentration camp prove that man cannot escape the
influences of his surroundings? Does man have no choice of action in
the face of such circumstances? We can answer these questions from
experience as well as on principle. The experiences of camp life show
that man does have a choice of action. There were enough examples,
often of a heroic nature, which proved that apathy could be overcome,
irritability suppressed. Man can preserve a vestige of spiritual
freedom, of independence of mind, even in such terrible conditions of
psychic and physical stress.


Fundamentally, therefore, any man can, even under such circumstances, decide what shall become of him—mentally and spiritually.

> One could make a victory of those experiences, turning life into an
> inner triumph, or one could ignore the challenge and simply vegetate,
> as did a majority of the prisoners.


Varying this, we could say that most men in a concentration camp
believed that the real opportunities of life had passed. Yet, in
reality, there was an opportunity and a challenge. One could make a
victory of those experiences, turning life into an inner triumph, or
one could ignore the challenge and simply vegetate, as did a majority
of the prisoners.

Emotion and suffering:

Spinoza: “Affectus, qui passio est, desinit esse passio simulatque eius claram et distinctam formamus ideam.” Emotion, which is suffering, ceases to be suffering as soon as we form a clear and precise picture of it.

>Those who know how close the connection is between the state of mind
>of a man—his courage and hope, or lack of them—and the state of
>immunity of his body will understand that the sudden loss of hope and
>courage can have a deadly effect

Those who know how close the connection is between the state of mind
of a man—his courage and hope, or lack of them—and the state of
immunity of his body will understand that the sudden loss of hope and
courage can have a deadly effect. The ultimate cause of my friend’s
death was that the expected liberation did not come and he was
severely disappointed. This suddenly lowered his body’s resistance
against the latent typhus infection. His faith in the future and his
will to live had become paralyzed and his body fell victim to
illness—and thus the voice of his dream was right after all.

>Nietzsche: “He who has a why to live for can bear with almost any how,”

As we said before, any attempt to restore a man’s inner strength in
the camp had first to succeed in showing him some future
goal. Nietzsche’s words, “He who has a why to live for can bear with
almost any how,” could be the guiding motto for all psychotherapeutic
and psychohygienic efforts regarding prisoners. Whenever there was an
opportunity for it, one had to give them a why—an aim—for their lives,
in order to strengthen them to bear the terrible how of their
existence.

> As we said before, any attempt to restore a man’s inner strength in
> the camp had first to succeed in showing him some future goal.
> “I have nothing to expect from life any more.” What sort of answer can
> one give to that? What was really needed was a fundamental change in
> our attitude toward life.

“I have nothing to expect from life any more.” What sort of answer can
one give to that? What was really needed was a fundamental change in
our attitude toward life.

We had to learn ourselves and, furthermore, we had to teach the
despairing men, that it did not really matter what we expected from
life, but rather what life expected from us. We needed to stop asking
about the meaning of life, and instead to think of ourselves as those
who were being questioned by life—daily and hourly. Our answer must
consist, not in talk and meditation, but in right action and in right
conduct. Life ultimately means taking the responsibility to find the
right answer to its problems and to fulfill the tasks which it
constantly sets for each individual. These tasks, and therefore the
meaning of life, differ from man to man, and from moment to
moment. Thus it is impossible to define the meaning of life in a
general way. Questions about the meaning of life can never be answered
by sweeping statements.

“Life” does not mean something vague, but something very real and
concrete, just as life’s tasks are also very real and concrete. They
form man’s destiny, which is different and unique for each
individual. No man and no destiny can be compared with any other man
or any other destiny. No situation repeats itself, and each situation
calls for a different response. Sometimes the situation in which a man
finds himself may require him to shape his own fate by action.

>We had to learn ourselves and, furthermore, we had to teach the
>despairing men, that it did not really matter what we expected from
>life, but rather what life expected from us. We needed to stop asking
>about the meaning of life, and instead to think of ourselves as those
>who were being questioned by life—daily and hourly. Our answer must
>consist, not in talk and meditation, but in right action and in right
>conduct


So I began by mentioning the most trivial of comforts first. I said
that even in this Europe in the sixth winter of the Second World War,
our situation was not the most terrible we could think of. I said that
each of us had to ask himself what irreplaceable losses he had
suffered up to then. I speculated that for most of them these losses
had really been few. Whoever was still alive had reason for
hope. Health, family, happiness, professional abilities, fortune,
position in society —all these were things that could be achieved
again or restored. After all, we still had all our bones
intact. Whatever we had gone through could still be an asset to us in
the future. And I quoted from Nietzsche: “Was mich nicht umbringt,
macht mich stärker.” (That which does not kill me, makes me stronger.)

> Nietzsche: “Was mich nicht umbringt, macht mich stärker.” (That which does not kill me, makes me stronger.)

## Third stage

>What can you tell us about the psychological make-up of the camp
>guards? How is it possible that men of flesh and blood could treat
>others as so many prisoners say they have been treated?

We now come to the third stage of a prisoner’s mental reactions: the
psychology of the prisoner after his liberation. But prior to that we
shall consider a question which the psychologist is asked frequently,
especially when he has personal knowledge of these matters: What can
you tell us about the psychological make-up of the camp guards? How is
it possible that men of flesh and blood could treat others as so many
prisoners say they have been treated? Having once heard these accounts
and having come to believe that these things did happen, one is bound
to ask how, psychologically, they could happen. To answer this
question without going into great detail, a few things must be pointed
out: First, among the guards there were some sadists, sadists in the
purest clinical sense.



> There are two races of men in this world, but only these two—the “race” of the decent man and the “race” of the indecent man.

From all this we may learn that there are two races of men in this world, but only these two—the “race” of the decent man and the “race” of the indecent man.


The crowning experience of all, for the homecoming man, is the wonderful feeling that, after all he has suffered, there is nothing he need fear any more—except his God.

>The Meaning of Life I doubt whether a doctor can answer this question
>in general terms. For the meaning of life differs from man to man,
>from day to day and from hour to hour. What matters, therefore, is not
>the meaning of life in general but rather the specific meaning of a
>person’s life at a given moment


The Meaning of Life I doubt whether a doctor can answer this question
in general terms. For the meaning of life differs from man to man,
from day to day and from hour to hour. What matters, therefore, is not
the meaning of life in general but rather the specific meaning of a
person’s life at a given moment. To put the question in general terms
would be comparable to the question posed to a chess champion: “Tell
me, Master, what is the best move in the world?” There simply is no
such thing as the best or even a good move apart from a particular
situation in a game and the particular personality of one’s
opponent. The same holds for human existence. One should not search
for an abstract meaning of life. Everyone has his own specific
vocation or mission in life to carry out a concrete assignment which
demands fulfillment. Therein he cannot be replaced, nor can his life
be repeated. Thus, everyone’s task is as unique as is his specific
opportunity to implement it.

>One Should not search for an abstract meaning of life. Everyone has his
>own specific vocation or mission in life to carry out a concrete
>assignment which demands fulfillment. Therein he cannot be replaced,
>nor can his life be repeated. Thus, everyone’s task is as unique as is
>his specific opportunity to implement it.


This emphasis on responsibleness is reflected in the categorical
imperative of logotherapy, which is: “Live as if you were living
already for the second time and as if you had acted the first time as
wrongly as you are about to act now!”

> Live as if you were living already for the second time and as if you had acted the first time as wrongly as you are about to act now!


Paradoxical intention is no panacea. Yet it lends itself as a useful tool in treating obsessive-compulsive and phobic conditions, especially in cases with underlying anticipatory anxiety.

> Freedom is but the negative aspect of the whole phenomenon whose
> positive aspect is responsibleness. In fact, freedom is in danger of
> degenerating into mere arbitrariness unless it is lived in terms of
> responsibleness.

Freedom, however, is not the last word. Freedom is only part of the
story and half of the truth. Freedom is but the negative aspect of the
whole phenomenon whose positive aspect is responsibleness. In fact,
freedom is in danger of degenerating into mere arbitrariness unless it
is lived in terms of responsibleness. That is why I recommend that the
Statue of Liberty on the East Coast be supplemented by a Statue of
Responsibility on the West Coast.

> A human being is not one thing among others; things determine each other, but man is ultimately self-determining. What he becomes—within the limits of endowment and environment—he has made out of himself.

A human being is not one thing among others; things determine each other, but man is ultimately self-determining. What he becomes—within the limits of endowment and environment—he has made out of himself.


## Logotherapy and the meaning of life

There are three main avenues on which one arrives at meaning in life.

1. Creating a work or by doing a deed
2. Experiencing something or encountering someone; in other words, meaning can be found not only in work but also in love.
3. Even the helpless victim of a hopeless situation, facing a fate he cannot change, may rise above himself, may grow beyond himself, and by so doing change himself. He may turn a personal tragedy into a triumph.


As logotherapy teaches, there are three main avenues on which one
arrives at meaning in life. The first is by creating a work or by
doing a deed. The second is by experiencing something or encountering
someone; in other words, meaning can be found not only in work but
also in love. Edith Weisskopf-Joelson observed in this context that
the logotherapeutic “notion that experiencing can be as valuable as
achieving is therapeutic because it compensates for our one-sided
emphasis on the external world of achievement at the expense of the
internal world of experience.”6 Most important, however, is the third
avenue to meaning in life: even the helpless victim of a hopeless
situation, facing a fate he cannot change, may rise above himself, may
grow beyond himself, and by so doing change himself. He may turn a
personal tragedy into a triumph. Again it was Edith Weisskopf-Joelson
who, as mentioned, once expressed the hope that logotherapy “may help
counteract certain unhealthy trends in the present-day culture of the
United States, where the incurable sufferer is given very little
opportunity to be proud of his suffering and to consider it ennobling
rather than degrading” so that “he is not only unhappy, but also
ashamed of being unhappy.”


And George A. Sargent was right when he promulgated the concept of
“learned meaninglessness.” He himself remembered a therapist who said,
“George, you must realize that the world is a joke. There is no
justice, everything is random. Only when you realize this will you
understand how silly it is to take yourself seriously. There is no
grand purpose in the universe. It just is. There’s no particular
meaning in what decision you make today about how to act.”


“Sed omnia praeclara tam difficilia quam rara sunt” (but everything great is just as difficult to realize as it is rare to find)

> “It is we ourselves who must answer the questions that life asks of us, and to these questions we can respond only by being responsible for our existence.”

It is true that they form a minority. More than that, they always will remain a minority. And yet I see therein the very challenge to join the minority. For the world is in a bad state, but everything will become still worse unless each of us does his best.


“It is we ourselves who must answer the questions that life asks of us, and to these questions we can respond only by being responsible for our existence.”
